In this unit we're going to talk about
a very important component of every
general purpose computer called ALU or
the Arithmetic Logic Unit.
Back in 1945 the mathematician
John Von Neumann wrote
a seminal paper in which
he included a diagram or
a description of how general
purpose computers can be built.
And this became to be known over the years
as the Von Neumann Architecture.
Now, when you look at this diagram, you
see that one key player in the diagram is
the central processing unit and
within this CPU, yet
another important piece the ALU or
the Arithmetic Logic Unit.
Now, if we obstruct the way all these
details and focus only on the ALU
we can think of an abstraction
which receives to multi-bit inputs.
We call them input one and input two, and
the third input is the function
that has to be computed.
So the ALU computes the function and
out comes the result of this computation.
Now, the function f is one out of
a family of predetermined functions
that taken together define what
this ALU is capable of doing.
Some of these functions are arithmetic and
some of these functions are logical.
So for example common computations
that ALU typically perform
are integer addition,
integer multiplication, integer division.
There may be some logical operations like
bit wise AND, bit wise OR and so on.
So there's a really interesting question,
which is when you set out to build an ALU,
how much functionality do you want
to build in this hardware device.
Well this is a classical hardware software
trade off question, because if you choose
not to implement something in hardware you
can always augment it later with software.
So if for some reason you decide that
the ALU will not include multiplication or
division, presumably at a later point
when you build your software layer
you will deal, you will complete
this functionality with software.
All right, now so
far everything that we said was true for
every ALU out there on any computer.
From now on we are going to focus on
one specific example of an ALU, we call
it the Hack ALU because this is the ALU
that will hum inside our hack computer.
This is the overall gate diagram, and
as we see the ALU has two 16-bit
data inputs which we call x and y.
It outputs a single 16-bit output which
we call out, which function to compute is
determined by six control bits that have
strange names like zx and nx and so on.
We will explain these names
in just a few minutes.
Based on these six control bits,
the ALU computes one out of
the following 18 functions of interest.
And I call these functions functions
of interest because in principle
the ALU can compute many more functions,
but
we've decided to focus on
these 18 functions only.
Now some of these
functions are very simple,
like the constance of 01 minus 1,
xy and so on.
And other functions are more involved and
interesting like x plus y,
x and y, and so on.
Now as we see from the diagram,
the ALU also computes
two 1-bit control outputs
which are called zr and ng.
The role of these two control bits and
the reason for
these names would become
clear later in the unit.
So let's move on and focus on
the output of the ALU from one side and
the control bits that caused
the ALU to compute these outputs,
and they cause it using this truth table.
So this truth table gives you a complete
functional specification of this ALU.
That is,
if you want to compute a certain function
you can look it up on the right
hand side of the table.
You can then read off the zeros and
ones that correspond to this function.
You enter the zeros and
ones into the control bits and boom,
using some sort of black magic,
the ALU will compute the desired function.
So let me illustrate how
the ALU works in action and
in order to do it,
I'm going to use our HDL simulator.
So we can fire up the simulator,
we can load the built-in ALU chip and
as a result,
we'll get this chip
into the HDL window and
once we do that,
notice that we also get some nice GUI.
And indeed, some of the built-in chips
in our simulator have a GUI side effect
that helps the user, you to understand
what goes on inside the respective chip.
So this is a diagram that
we made up to help you
keep track of what happens inside the ALU.
So moving along, we begin testing.
As you can notice we have set the ALU
inputs to two values, which are 30 and 20.
And we also set the control
bits to 000111,
which if you look at the table
that I showed you before,
what they mean is it's a directive
that tells the ALU compute y-x.
So the next thing that we do,
is we have to tell the simulator
to actually do something.
And we do it by clicking
this calculator icon, and
this tells the LU to evaluate
the chip logic on the given inputs.
So this is what happens next and
then we can inspect the outputs and
if we do that indeed we see that the ALU
came out with what was advertised,
which is minus 10, the result of y- x.
So it looks like the ALU at least
in this example, works well.
Let me give you a second example,
which demonstrates the logical
computational abilities of the ALU.
The first thing that I do is I
tell the simulator to revert to
working with a Boolean formats rather
than decimal formats which make it
much it much easier to enter zeros and
ones into the various inputs of the ALU,
and that's what we do here.
So I picked up two arbitrary
examples of 16-bit zeros and
ones values, I entered them.
And then I entered also
the control bit values
000000 which happens to be
the directive to compute x and y.
Once again, if you look at the truth
table, you will see this role listed out.
And indeed after we click the calculator
icon, which I've skipped in this example,
we see that the ALU actually
computed bit wise in the operation,
and the result was the bit wise
end of the two given inputs.
So so far, it seems like the ALU
is functioning quite well,
at least in these two examples.
Well, we didn't say anything
about how the ALU actually works.
Everything so far was kind of magic.
So now is the time to
open up the black box and
understand how the ALU
actually performs this magic.
So once again this is the gate diagram or
the interface diagram of the ALU, and
I want to focus on the six control
bits and explain the names and
operations of every one of these bits.
So if zx=1, what we want to
do is set the x input to 0.
So irrespective of what x is it can
be 17 or 19 or 5,003 or whatever.
We set it to zero that's
what we do if the x is 1.
If nx is 1, we set the x input to
not x this is Bitwise negation,
and also notice that these two
things happen one after the other.
So for example,
if zx equals 1 and nx equals 1,
first of all, we 0 the x input and
then we negate it.
So we'll get 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
if this is indeed the values
of these two control bits.
The same thing exactly happens
with a y input using the zy and
ny directives if you will,
then we have an f bit.
If f is 1, we compute x plus y.
If f is 0, we compute x and y.
Now, these are the processed x and y.
So before we do these computations,
the x and
ys have already undergone these
manipulations that we talked about before.
They became either zero or negator or
nothing, maybe we didn't touch them, and
then we compute either addition or
16-bit ending.
Finally, we have the no bit.
If the no bit is 1,
we negate the resulting output.
The output that we just computed and
if no is 0, we leave it as is.
If we do all of these operations
one after the other then
what comes out is the desired function.
And now that you understand
these semantics,
you can actually look at the table and
try to convince yourself.
You can actually prove that this
table delivers the required results,
and I will demonstrate
to you how we can do it.
So let's pick up one example,
let's see how value computes not x.
So I look up not x in the right-hand side.
I see it right there, and then I
look up the binary values of the six
control bits and I start simulating
on paper what happens inside the ALU.
So in order to do it I have to come up
with some arbitrary examples of x and y.
So I make up two values and I use 4-bits
instead of 16 to make it less tedious.
So I have these two examples x and
y arbitrarily chosen,
and then I look at the control bits.
Zx equals 0, and nx equals 0,
which means that we don't touch
the x input, we leave it as is.
And then we move onto the y input and
we see that zy equals 1,
so we 0 the y input and
n y equals 1, so we negate it and
what we get is the result 1, 1, 1, 1.
Moving along f is 0 and if f is 0,
we want to compute x and y.
So we compute x and
y and we get 1, 1, 0, 0.
This is a bit wise end and
finally, no is 1.
So we negate the result,
and we get 0, 0, 1, 1.
Lo and behold, 0, 0, 1,
1 is exactly not of x.
If you look at the original x,
which was 1, 1, 0, 0, we got not x.
So we have proved that
this row in the truth
table performs as advertised, so to speak.
Moving along, we can take another example,
and this will be the final example.
We look at y-x,
an arithmetic operation and
once again we see the binary values,
and we begin simulating them.
So once again, we start with two
arbitrary examples of x and y.
I've chosen 2 and 7.
This is arithmetic operations so
it's easier to think about it then
both in decimal and in binary.
So we have 2 and 7.
And if everything works well,
we should get the result 5 because y- x,
7- 2, should give us 5.
So we see that zx is 0 and nx is 0, so we
don't touch the x input, it remains as is.
And moving along, we see that zy is 0,
so we don't touch the y input.
But ny is 1,
which means that we have to negate it.
So 0, 1, 1, 1 became 1, 0, 0, 0.
Moving along, we see that f equals 1.
So we compute the addition, and
if we add up x and y, we get 1, 0, 1, 0.
No also equals 1, so we negate
the result and we get 0, 1, 0, 1.
And 1, 0, 1 represents 5,
which is exactly what we wanted.
So once again you see that the ALU
performed as specified and
many of you may still wonder how
this magic actually happens.
We were told that we have
to do subtraction and
actually we did addition, and
we got the result that we expected.
Well we don't want to get too much into
it, but if you go back and read or look
at the units where we discussed the two's
complement method, you will understand
also the internal mechanics here, and
why everything comes out as expected.
Now as we said earlier in the unit,
the ALU also
computes an output to
a 1-bit output control bits.
And these bits are called zr and ng, and
the role of these bits is
to say something about
the main output of the ALU denoted out.
Specifically, if out equals 0,
the ALU sets zr to 1.
Otherwise, the zr becomes 0, and
if out is negative then ng equals 1.
Otherwise, ng equals 0.
Now, you may ask yourself why
do we need these two bits?
Well, this will become clear when we
put together the overall computer
architecture in which these two
bits play an important role.
I'd like to make a few end
notes about the Hack ALU.
I hope that we have convinced
you that it's a simple concept.
It is very elegant, and
surprisingly it's also
extremely easy to implement and
let me explain why.
If you remember what we do with
ALU given all these control bits,
in some cases we have to set
16-bit values to 0s, easy.
In other case, we have to set it to 1,
also very easy.
In some cases,
we have to negate an incoming value.
We've done it before I
think in project one.
We built a gate that does
exactly 16-bit negation.
And in some other cases we have
to compute either plus or end and
these two computations were already,
are already taken care of using the chips
that you designed in previous projects.
So all together,
there is very little to do.
Everything was done in one way or
another by existing chips that
you have already developed.
So to sum up this is Leonardo da Vinci,
one of the greatest
inventor's in history and
Leonardo said that simplicity
is the ultimate sophistication.
And I hope that I convince you that
the Hack ALU is both simple but
quite sophisticated.
So this has been the unit on the ALU, and
this leads up to the next unit in
which we will get our hands dirty and
build one such ALU,
along with some other chips.